pork is already the most consumed meat
in the world and fueled by the global
demand for inexpensive meat the industry
continues to grow in the United States
the waste produced by industrial pig
farms is a major problem
[Music]
China is the world's biggest pork
producer as Chinese consumers become
more affluent demand continues to grow
there's just not any empty frontiers
anymore on the planet if the Chinese try
to eat like Americans what will happen
to the Amazon rainforest to feed the
pigs as cheaply as possible
soy is being grown on a massive scale
especially in Brazil we make the food
that goes on the global populations
table soy cultivation is helping to
drive the deforestation of the Amazon
grown as a monoculture Tsai is impacting
the whole world
[Music]
China's population has now topped 1.4
billion rising affluence has led to
changes in people's diets in the past
rice vegetables and noodles dominated
while meat was rare but today pork has
become increasingly popular China
consumes more than 50 million tons of
pork per year that's more than half of
the world's production
[Music]
oh this is the beginning of the
slaughterhouse chain we slaughter about
600 pigs per hour the equipment is
imported from a Dutch company this
factory was built in the 1950s and in
1998 we shifted to large-scale
production the impact of China's pork
boom is being felt around the world
Chinese companies are snapping up huge
industrial pig farms like one in the US
state of North Carolina the pigs in
North Carolina were owned by traditional
family farmers raising about two million
pigs they're about twenty-two thousand
of them they all got replaced by this
factory system and initially Smithfield
Foods and Murphy were the owners of that
they were American corporations but now
they've been bought out by a group
called the WH group the old sunway
corporation out of China
it's a multinational corporation
headquartered in China you know very
wealthy you know they made I understand
their profits for the first quarter of
this year just their net profit first
quarter this year was two hundred
million dollars and you look at all the
cesspools and you say to yourself hey
they got the money to fix this what's
holding everything up well what's
holding everything up is the fact that
they don't want to spend that money to
fix the problem they'd rather
externalize the cost of their waste
treatment on the people of North
Carolina this will film our whole trip
as as we go through swine country it'll
pick up everything we see all along the
way and then if we spot some illegal
discharges then we'll do some special
filming of that one
[Music]
that means wine
massive farms with huge manure lagoons
extending as far as the eye can see as a
result of these industrial scale farms
many local residents feel under siege
we're not anti farmer or anti business
in North Carolina we're just about doing
it correctly and not polluting the
citizens of North Carolina's waterways
concentrated animal farms are in
rural communities where the community
does not have a voice to put up a fight
to restrict these facilities from coming
in here
[Music]
and when they come in here they they
preach about having jobs to help the
community but even then the jobs are
what a community member would want there
working in a slaughterhouse or working
on
hog farm is not easy work and it's
you very rarely see the owners of these
facilities living on-site LC herring
lives near one of these farms called
Capo's concentrated animal feeding
operations so we don't open up the
windows on this side this is a bathroom
window the room next door that was my
brother's bedroom and it blended this
way is the kitchen window so we don't
open these windows that are on this side
facing this way feel the K folds are
back here to the stuff of my mother's
house right back here straight back but
you can't see them from here but you can
see them from the mail route Road when
it's P spring that means it's wrong so
that means we are inhaling this stuff
when everything is in life you know the
hallways to urine the antibiotics the
ammonia everything that's been you know
in the lagoon
it's being released into our atmosphere
so we can open our windows we don't open
the doors you know you pretty much
prisoner and I won't home and when you
do try to go out when he's spraying you
have to hold your breath because it'll
take your breath away
don't make your eyes start watering you
make you stop coughing gagging you feel
like you want to throw up it makes you
angry
you know you get depressed because no
one is listening and it just doesn't
seem to me how someone could believe
that they have a right to blow animal
waste on another here with me Smithfield
Foods the largest pork producer in the
US is now owned by a Chinese company
during the 90s we saw 90% of all our hog
farms disappear in the United States the
cash market dwindled from 100% of the
market to less than 5% of the market the
majority of animals now are raised under
contracts and so you saw this
traditional profitable industry for
raising hogs get wiped out and replace
with this new way of raising animals
that was industrialized and centrally
controlled it was really a corporate
takeover and it happened in a very short
period of time most hog production today
in the United States is produced in this
industrial model it's called vertical
integration
[Music]
the way it works is that a company will
own the nursery where the hogs are born
it'll own the feed mill that produces
the feed for the Hogs it owns the
trucking lines that transport the Hogs
it even owns the slaughterhouse where
the pigs are killed and turned into a
variety of product this was a business
it used to be a pillar of rural America
and then it got taken over by Smithfield
that you know this is a company that had
spent decades devouring independent
firms in the United States and acquiring
a kind of market share that never should
have been allowed to fall under the
umbrella of one firm it is not a good
idea to allow one firm to control 30
percent of the entire market in the pork
industry or food industry once that
happened though it became a very
attractive target for any kind of
overseas company that could afford to
buy it just a huge sector of productive
capacity in rural America I mean we're
talking about thousands of large-scale
farms there's a lot of money being made
raising pigs in the United States the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange is one of
the biggest in the world agricultural
commodities are also traded here
well down here this is this is now the
financial room here we're standing in so
over here we have bond option trading we
have tea bonds here our agricultural
sector has been diminished over here
which we still do the options on
soybeans wheat in corn we also do
livestock China for years and years has
been trying to eat like a westerner
which we consume about 3400 calories per
day China is now approaching 2,900
calories so they've really caught up
with where we are in caloric intake
China has the largest hog herd in the
name in the world accounting for about
47 percent of all pork productions but
again when we look at meat consumption
or caloric consumption going forward
it's got to happen in countries like
Bangladesh Nigeria Pakistan India these
are they're gonna be the big drivers of
calories over the next 10 to 20 years
heretofore they don't have the GDP rates
to expand their meat consumption much
like China didn't become a big meet
consumer until the 2001-2002 period when
its GDP levels started to rally
dramatically China's hunger for pork is
driving Chinese companies to scour the
world in search of new production
facilities and expertise
I think having a secured pork market is
very important in China and that's part
of the reason why young we are now it's
known as WH group why they looked to
acquire Smithfield's you know America's
largest pork producer one I think they
wanted access to supply but to from what
I've heard from Smithfield's executives
is that they wanted to learn how the
American pork operations worked how we
were able to produce so much pork on so
very little land and that means that
this American industrialized style of
producing pork is being exported to
China when it comes to industrial meat
production
China has caught up with the West its
mechanized and operates on a mass scale
[Music]
in 1961 this was a small slaughterhouse
for chickens and other animals beginning
in 1992 the government encouraged
facilities like this to become more
efficient they allowed us to grow and
acquire new machinery in order to adopt
a more industrial approach from 2003 to
2006 we experienced an annual growth
rate of around 30% when you are feeding
so many animals in such a small space
animals health is compromised
antibiotics become used routinely both
for illness prevention and to increase
weight gain and animals in general if
you have a few pigs on a farm their
waste is an asset it's something you can
spread on your fields it's a fantastic
fertilizer you have a complete nutrient
cycle but when you have 10,000 or 20,000
hogs in a small facility their waste is
a huge liability in 1960 there was less
than 10 billion animals killed per year
for food today there's over 70 billion
and if the trajectory of NIDA fication
continues there will be a hundred and
twenty billion animals killed for food
by 2050 industrial livestock operations
effectively command about a third of the
world's arable land that includes the
majority of the world's coarse grain
production the biggest coarse grains in
maize and and a huge source of oil seeds
principally soybeans on a world scale
and so there are these huge flows of
grain and oilseed monocultures through
when I call islands of concentrated
animals
SOI cultivation is having a massive
impact on industrial farming China's
hunger for meat is causing more and more
soy to be planted for use as animal feed
China as a country consumes twice as
much meat as the United States but each
person is only consuming half as much as
Americans so more the Chinese able to
fully emulate the American diet right
it's hard to say where that meat would
come from already China is is increasing
its imports of pork it's increasing its
imports of soybeans that are fed to the
livestock whether it's the pork the
chicken the beef or the or the farmed
fish they're incorporating a lot more
soybean in their diet so the Chinese
government well aware of the the dangers
of famine having lived through the
Chinese famine where official records
say some 36 million people died they
wanted to make sure that they could
secure their food supply at homes if the
Chinese try to eat like Americans what
will happen to the Amazon rainforest
where where will we find the land to
grow that much soy to grow that much
green there's just not any empty
frontiers anymore on the planet the
situation in Brazil is a case in point
in 2019 deforestation soared
president jarba son ro who took office
early that year is keen to promote the
country's agricultural industry and soy
is a lynchpin soy monocultures have come
to dominate places like santarm in the
brazilian state of Para maria arruda
lives next to a soy plantation right
there behind our homes there's a soybean
plantation watch your head
[Music]
this is all plantation we're surrounded
by soybean it's all around us we're
right in the middle all this land used
to be a family farm now it's been turned
into a soy monoculture and because it's
all grown for export none of it remains
in Brazil
a truck full of soy has tipped over on a
road in the state of mato grosso workers
are gathering up the valuable soybeans
by hand
this used to be rainforest
now it's soy fields stretching right out
to the horizon a local farmer shows us
around before we started cultivating
this was all forest it was cheap land
the only thing here was forests and
trees it looked the way it does on the
other side of the road we used to clear
the land simply as a way to survive this
region's economy is almost entirely
based on soil this is our vocation it's
all we know how to do we grow the food
that ends up on the global populations
table soy bean is an imported crop that
we have adapted to conditions here we
realized that it grows very well here
and that we have the right conditions
for it with the help of gene technology
we slowly improved the soybeans today we
have varieties specifically developed
for our region
[Music]
we pay a visit to an agricultural trade
fair in lucas de rio verde in the state
of mato grosso soybeans have made a
number of farmers rich here including
Ottaviano pavetta
[Music]
they are epic in agriculture along the
river and the zoo I had a small farm in
Rio Grande de su I had 15 hectares I
drove here with a small truck to help my
uncle who was moving here I was young
and very enthusiastic and I thought I
could make a good future for myself here
I was lucky and many different things
came together I was in the right place
in the right time exactly when the world
began asking for more protein and food I
had a dream an unusual dream almost a
fantasy
fortunately reality has proved even
better than my dreams my company has 270
thousand hectares under cultivation
I've publicly listed the company and
sold 70% of its stock now I'm a
shareholder an advisor
Essaouira aqui no brasil en todo
emissary su a Lokomotiva both in Brazil
and in the entire southern hemisphere
saw as the spearhead of a new model of
capital production called agribusiness
soy is a standardized grain which has
become a commodity it's the same all
over the world it's easy to grow on a
very large scale here in Brazil some of
our soy farms cover 240,000 hectares the
global market is controlled by only five
companies bunga Monsanto ADM Cargill and
dreyfus they speculate with the prices
speculate with stocks and manipulate the
market they've managed to transform soy
into the main ingredient in animal feed
pig feed cow feed and chicken feed that
means that soy is now a very important
raw material in human nutrition the
world has become one giant pigsty
corporations use soy as if it were the
only food we have in the world we have
the same seeds the same agrochemicals
the same trading companies the same
price setting mechanisms the same
players it's a very homogeneous
production system even though it's very
diverse in its integration into
radically different ecosystems in social
settings it's a production system that
generates its own homogeneity in order
to be able to attend this global market
in this region the producers mainly come
from other countries but some of them
come from mato grosso and pern our
local people have also started planting
it maybe they've realized that it's good
business but most of the people who
plant soy come from abroad they also use
a lot of machinery and those machines
take our jobs
hardly any people work in those fields
there's no more work for local people
the plantations hire a few to drive
tractors but apart from that they do all
the work themselves
this building houses the santarem farm
workers union local people are
benefitting very little from the soybean
boom small hold farmers can't compete
with the industrial farming operations
which can produce more efficiently what
have you got there soybeans no there's
no soy here our products aren't worth
anything only the big farms can make
money small ones can you can try to
plant corn but then where are you going
to sell it in the end there's no profit
to be had in it the markets only for big
growers if you want to plant soy you
need big machines tractors we can't
afford that kind of equipment soy is not
made for small holders it's that simple
they have a lot of different ways to
fight pests and then all those pests end
up in our fields so when we plant beans
now we end up with nothing they use
pesticides and the insects end up in our
fields we can't do anything about it we
used to plant beans and would fill two
entire sacks of them it's true now we've
stopped planting them the pests from the
land that belongs to the rich people
come here and destroy our seeds in the
United States in China can't they just
destroy their own forests to plant
soybeans
why do they have to come to Brazil and
exploit our resources Africa has plenty
of forests why don't they go there maybe
they don't work hard enough or they have
more nerve the soy boom has in fact
reached Africa Mozambique is nearly
10,000 kilometers from Brazil but
Brazilian companies are moving in trying
to secure vast tracts of land for
soybean farming the agribusiness project
is being promoted by the prosavana
program Brazilian farmers are going to
Africa because mozambique's government
is leasing land at a very cheap price to
create new plantations Muslim beak is
giving Brazilian farmers a 6 million
hectare area three times bigger than
sare cheap estate and almost for free
it's going to be a lease that will allow
for the cultivation of soy cotton and
corn mainly for the Chinese market
machinist we accompany human rights
activists Jeremias Wong Sonia on a visit
to the Nacala region a lot of land here
is slated to go to the Brazilians
how you doing good and you find my
friend thank you just rain yes it rained
a lot we might have a good harvest this
year and the next one we don't have
enough land here we already have
conflicts among ourselves if investors
come the conflict will become worse the
land belongs to the people of Mozambique
we're not against development but we
believe that the community should be
consulted despite what our government
says we don't eat soybeans we eat our
local crops we gave the government some
advice before implementing the project
they need to involve local farmers what
happened instead is that meetings were
not public not at the district or at the
national level
[Music]
we've been threatened and intimidated
any farmers are facing criminal charges
for a new difficult for an intimate a
dish so you believe that prosavana is
not helping farmers no prosavana is not
good for us
prosavana is a joint program involving
Mozambique Japan and Brazil it's
official goal is to promote development
in the Nacala region
[Music]
when civic organizations investigated
the situation we realized that
prosavana was an umbrella project
designed to paved a way for big
investors and agribusiness giants anyone
who was interested in taking control of
water land and natural resources in the
Nacala corridor of mozambique local
farmers were displaced and five million
people in the region have been affected
and requested a populist sound given a
necessary geoguessr condition come you
know
this has what is this your land is this
the land you want to occupy this is just
a declaration you do not have a
certificate for land use this is only a
statement about where you live it
specifies where your community lives and
operates but this certificate does not
give you rights to use the land that's
why you have to be careful someone else
could have laid claim to a land use
certificate the community needs to fight
to get the proper documentation if we
don't deal with this situation it might
soon be too late in 2016 opponents of
the prosavana program organized a major
protest they succeeded in convincing the
government to suspend it for a long time
mozambique's government implemented its
policies without any outside input now
they finally been challenged by an
opposition movement by farm workers who
said that this is not the way to promote
agricultural development they show that
it is possible to resist to protest and
to say no you are the ones who are
sustaining this country 90% of the food
that we eat in Mozambique is produced by
small farmers not by big companies or by
projects from Brazil or who knows where
we have to be very careful with these
big projects they come here and promise
all kinds of things but when these
projects end what do they do they leave
they move somewhere else to pursue other
goals whatever the market demands
despite some small successes in places
like Mozambique around the world meat
consumption continues to soar and with
it the soy industry in Brazil new
plantations are concentrated in the
Amazon region president balsa narrows
policies opposing an additional threat
to this fragile ecosystem this is a map
of the Amazon region everything in red
is land that's been deforested it makes
up 19% of the rainforest this area which
begins in redonda is known as the arc of
deforestation 62% of this area is
soybean monoculture another 6% are mixed
crops but even that includes a lot of
soybean well by summing sergeant taking
rain forests and plowing that into a
soybean monoculture turns up an awful
lot of carbon that has been stored in
the soil stored in the in the forest so
that that those vast monocultures emit a
lot of greenhouse gases just in turning
it over the first time but then every
time you're plowing you have the
emissions from the agricultural
machinery itself and then you have the
emissions of crushing the soybeans
processing it and shipping them back to
China
it's an enormous Lee energy intensive
process
in the context of climate change how do
we reduce agricultural footprint and
landscapes and enhance carbon
sequestration the clearance of tropical
rainforests for either pasture or
large-scale monocultures has has an
enormous climate implication in terms of
the release of carbon from those
ecosystems and in the case of industrial
monocultures to make them to make those
nutrient poor soils productive for
farming requires very considerable
fertilizer what's happening here in
brazil is a crime an agricultural crime
to plant soy in this tropical humid
region you have to bring fertilizer here
from China nitrogen and phosphate from
who knows where the soil here does not
have enough of those elements this is a
mistake it's throwing nature out of
balance and it's destroying biodiversity
in this area here in the southern Amazon
in mato grosso you can drive 200
kilometres without seeing any other crop
plants all you see is soy and there are
no people either because soy displaces
people too you know they're my Jim
teaspoons of it so sorry
[Music]
we'll the rich biodiversity of the
region be replaced by soy monoculture
[Music]
we're importing 20 million tonnes of
additives each year nitrogen fertilizers
pesticides Brazil has become the world's
largest consumer of pesticides Brazil
consumes 20% of the world's pesticide
production it's absurd we consume an
average of five liters of pesticide per
person in rural areas it's an average of
15 litres per hectare
there's no University Department of
Agriculture anywhere in the world that
says you need 15 litres of pesticides to
grow one hectare of soybeans easily
through seven
today soy plantations in Brazil already
cover an area the size of Germany yields
are high in part thanks to heavy use of
pesticides these are the beans we've
just harvested do you eat them eat no I
prefer not to we spray them with various
products
we have to wait a while before eating
them it's very bitter do you want to try
one animal feed destined for China's
pork chicken and beef industry the trade
war with the US has also encouraged
China to buy its soy from Brazil
[Music]
it makes no sense to take these soybeans
from mato grosso put them on a truck and
drive 3000 kilometers to a port then
travel another 20,000 kilometers onboard
a ship to reach another port in China
and then travel another 2,000 kilometers
by train until they reach a factory farm
where the soy is used to feed chickens
soy is rich in protein and cheap the
ideal animal feed for industrial
livestock farming around the world as a
result of globalization Brazil is
destroying its rainforest to grow
soybeans
this soy ends up on the other side of
the world in Chinese pig farms and
European ones
China has announced plans to cut meat
consumption in half by 2030
not long ago a swine fever outbreak
killed vast numbers of pigs in China but
in the long term production is likely to
rise again
[Music]
China's rising middle class is unlikely
to lose its taste for meat
ha they have a microchip in their ears
called an ear tag we monitored that are
constantly using a computer or an iPad
are they humble or industrial farming is
growing ever more efficient
thanks to soybean feed and the use of
high-tech industrialized meat production
leads to rock-bottom prices
the narrative that the world must double
its food production by 2050 as we moved
from seven billion people today to nine
to ten billion people central to that is
rising livestock production and
consumption as this inevitable force in
world agriculture and that is something
that I think needs to be fundamentally
destabilized that it's not inevitable
that human beings will continue
consuming more and more animal flesh per
person we don't need to be doubling food
production we need to be producing food
in very different ways and thinking
about diets as a very fundamental part
of how reconfiguring agricultural
society there's bread some people are
hoping to reverse this trend back in the
u.s. we meet Jude Becker an organic
farmer in Iowa he puts a premium on
quality over quantity
for me it's obvious that we need to eat
less meat and and people criticize me
because this is Iowa and we have a lot
of meat production here though so oh
dude you can't say that you can't say to
eat less meat but I do
why why why who was being hurt by this
if it's healthy to eat less meat then
wouldn't the farmers and I will be
better to produce a special kind of high
quality meat and to have less animals
but get paid more and I think that
everybody would be better off
financially and better off healthy
health-wise at the end of the day but
people are afraid because large
integrated companies would would lose
money so you can't say these things in
public at North Carolina some Pig
farmers are also trying to make the
switch to organic but they can't match
the rock-bottom prices of the major
producers price is the top criterion for
most consumers says organic farmer
Calvin Knapp shrub we want to run into
the grocery store you know the super
Walmart and we want to grab something we
look down the aisle and it says you know
certified organic you know and that's
maybe 50 to 60 percent more than
something that was grown over here why I
don't want that I can't afford it but
you know what you still got the almighty
dollar stuck in your pocket because you
just saved yourself 50% because you
bought something that who knows what
they were doing to it or who knows how
they were growing it
SOI monoculture and industrialized
livestock farming how long can this
system of cheap meat production be
sustained let me say it this way as our
population begins to grow and it's
growing one day there won't be no meat
because the human beings I have to eat
the grain like they did back many years
ago when they did have so much meat
after a while it's going to cost it's
already you can feed more people with
soybeans corn than you can with meat if
you want to feed the starving world cut
out feeding all these cows and stuff
like that and feed the people why they
can get to fill their bellies that
somebody wants to make money but they
talk about we want to feed the world if
you want to feed the world you can feed
more world with grains and you can't
with meat
[Music]
you